[THEME MUSIC]
>>HARLEY ROTBART:
My current career
as a inspirational
writer, if you will,
is very different
than my first career
as a evidence-based
clinician and scientist.
>>GEORGE NOORY: You've
seen miracles in your life,
haven't you?
>>ROTBART: I have.
That gap between scientific
knowledge and what's
really out there is where
there's room for God.
>>NOORY: Who creates
the miracles?
Is it us, or are we
tapping into something?
>>ROTBART: The capacity
to create miracles
exists within every one of us.
We don't know who's going to
be affected by what we do.
But people are going to
And that's where we
can create miracles.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NOORY: Well, welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Dr. Harley Rotbart is back with
us, an internationally renowned
infectious disease specialist.
He's a pediatrician,
a parenting expert,
a speaker of all things
great, and an educator.
He's a professor and vice chair
Emeritus at the University
of Colorado School of
Medicine, author of more than--
get this--
175 medical and scientific
publications, as well as
at least five books
for general audiences.
How many books do you have
out there, five or more?
>>ROTBART: Six now.
>>NOORY: That's what I thought.
My god, they keep coming.
>>ROTBART: [CHUCKLES]
>>NOORY: And the name
of the latest book is--
>>ROTBART: "No Regrets Living--
7 Keys to a Life of
Wonder and Contentment."
>>NOORY: And we're going to
go through some of those seven
keys.
But Harley, how have you been?
>>ROTBART: Thank you.
It's a pleasure to be here.
I had a chance to speak
with you on the radio,
and it's nice to see
you in three dimensions.
>>NOORY: We had great response
to you when you were on "Coast
to Coast"--
>>ROTBART: Thank you.
>>NOORY: --just
absolutely stunning
>>ROTBART: Thank you.
>>NOORY: How did
you get involved
in the field you're in today?
>>ROTBART: Well,
my current career
as a sort of inspirational
[CHUCKLES] writer, if you will,
is very different
than my first career
as a evidence-based
clinician and scientist.
And it really began
about 40 years ago
with two parallel motivations.
One of them was the
death of my dad.
My dad was a concentration camp
survivor, a European immigrant.
And he died tragically
of pancreatic cancer
at a very young age, before he
had a chance to meet my wife,
to know his grandkids.
But I also did not have
a chance to know him
as well as I wish I would have.
I don't know what his
worldview was coming out
of the camps on God, on
fate, on the Messiah.
And I'm sorry I didn't ask.
I was in the go-go years
of my young adulthood,
and there just wasn't a lot
of time to sit down and talk.
And the second motivating factor
was that, also 40 years ago, I
took care of a child in
the intensive care unit
at Children's Hospital
in Philadelphia, who,
for all intents and
purposes, was dead.
He was in a prolonged coma, was
never going to come out of it.
Then he walked out of the
hospital fully recovered.
>>NOORY: My god.
>>ROTBART: Exactly.
And those two events
led me to ask colleagues
if they had had
similar miraculous
or unexplainable, unforgettable
clinical experiences.
And that resulted in a book
five years ago called "Miracles
We Have Seen" that I wrote.
And it was a
collection of 85 essays
from the most respected
physicians in the country
describing cases that
they could never forget,
the outcomes that they
could never have predicted,
miraculous cases.
And those essays were
filled with the dilemma
of faith versus science,
of belief versus medicine.
And I wanted to expand on that.
And the No Regrets Living
Project that I then undertook
was to try and further explore
the relationship between faith,
God, and evidence-based
medicine and science.
>>NOORY: Is there a
mixture between the two
that makes it work?
>>ROTBART: Yes, I believe--
and I use that
word selectively--
I believe that science
is evidence for God.
Now I'm an
evidence-based physician,
evidence-based scientist.
I believe in the Big Bang.
I believe in science.
I believe in the science that
I generated in my laboratory
for many years.
I believe in that science.
I believe in it unless and
until it's proven wrong.
And we think back to
the time of Hippocrates,
who had the theory of the
four humors and the four
temperaments, which now as
scientists and physicians,
we laugh at.
And someday, we may laugh at
the theory of the Big Bang.
We may laugh at the
theory of virus origins.
But for right now, I'm
a believer in science.
But I'm also a realist,
and I appreciate all
that we do not learn
from science, everything
that we'll never
learn from science.
And that gap between
scientific knowledge and what's
really out there is where
there's room for God.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
And it's so refreshing
to hear this
come from a man of
science, because that
doesn't happen a lot.
>>ROTBART: [CHUCKLES]
Hearing myself talk
and trying to project what my
colleagues are hearing when
they hear me talk,
it might sound
a little kind of ethereal,
a little mystical.
And I do have a mystical
sense, but I'm really
firmly rooted in science.
And there is nothing,
nothing about anything
that we know about
science that disproves
the existence of something
greater out there.
I don't-- I use the word "God."
Everyone else has a--
can have a different
explanation, a different term.
But there's something
else that's out there.
There has to be,
because there's so much
that we don't understand, and
that we'll never understand.
>>NOORY: There was a Gaia
program called "Sacred Powers."
And Caroline Myss talks about
the modern nature of God.
>>CAROLINE MYSS: How we
understand the nature of God
is undergoing the most
significant transformation
in the history of humanity.
Hi, I'm Carolyn Myss, and we
can't talk about sacred power
without talking about God.
Never before has
humanity experienced
this level of disengagement
from religious traditions,
or the very question of
the existence of God.
Now think about that.
Think about that, the fact
that for the first time
in the history of humanity,
a vast majority of people
are questioning the
existence of God.
For every choice,
there's a consequence.
What's the consequence
of a high percentage
of people in a
society questioning
the existence of God?
And I'm not speaking to you
from the position of, let's say,
fundamentalism, or Armageddon,
where I'm warning you
that the fires of hell are
going to come raining down,
because I don't
believe in any of that.
I just-- I'm talking pure,
mystical law, that there's
a cause and there's effect.
There's action and
there's reaction,
and that we live
in a universe where
our thoughts and our
collective consciousness
holds together the
world that we live in.
So when a high percentage
of the population
begins to question
the nature of God,
what happens to the
collective, the global,
the different
pockets of society?
Anger, division, and disdain
at traditional religion's
inability to keep up with
the needs of a modern devotee
has only encouraged people
to become very distant
from religions that
they've been connected to.
>>NOORY: She's basically telling
us, Harley, as you've said,
that there is a God.
>>ROTBART: She is.
And she's also asking
a critical question
that I'm going to try to answer.
And that is, what happens--
what are the consequences of
people, and increasing numbers
of people, not believing in
a higher power, in something
greater than ourselves?
And the consequences are
in the newspaper every day.
In the newspaper every day,
we are confronted by evil--
>>NOORY: Evil, constant.
>>ROTBART: --absolute evil.
And I mentioned it earlier.
The consequence of not believing
in God is the Holocaust.
It is genocide around the
world after the Holocaust
and before the Holocaust.
Its mass shootings.
It is a disregard, a disrespect,
for our fellow humans.
Why?
Because we don't feel
as if we're answerable.
We don't feel as if there is
a consequence to our actions.
And that is ultimately
the consequence
of more and more people not
believing in something greater
than ourselves.
We are not the be
all and the end all.
>>NOORY: I've always
wondered about somebody
who goes into a factory
or a work environment,
shoots it up, kills six
people, then kills themself.
Why do they do that?
Why don't they just end their
own life first and get over
with it?
>>ROTBART: Right.
I think there's a
combination of factors there.
And I'm by no means
expert in mass shootings,
but I do spend a lot of my
time dealing with human nature.
And I think that people are
desperate for an impact.
And if they have no other
recourse to creating impact,
they choose an impact
that satisfies them,
and then they're done.
Then they end their own lives.
And I think people
have to find--
one of the keys of the
no regrets living concept
is people have to seek
purpose in their lives.
And people who have
purpose in their lives
don't go into factories
and shoot people.
>>NOORY: No.
>>ROTBART: They don't
build gas chambers,
and they don't commit suicide.
People who have purpose and--
>>NOORY: They love life.
>>ROTBART: They love life.
They have meaning.
They have reason.
They have goals.
>>NOORY: And they love people.
>>ROTBART: And they love people.
>>NOORY: I mean, I've always--
you talk about the Holocaust.
Before Hitler And
the Nazis started
doing what they were
doing, they were
welcomed by many US corporations
and bankers and individuals.
They thought this guy
was a great leader.
What the heck happened to him?
How would-- how could
he go through that
and change the way he
changed to become so evil?
>>ROTBART: I'm a
pediatrician at heart.
And I believe that
evil originates
in childhood, and that--
>>NOORY: Something happens.
>>ROTBART: --something
happens in childhood.
And there are exceptions.
There are horrible
exceptions of people
raised in loving households
who end up doing evil things.
>>NOORY: Because maybe they're
born with some deficiency
or something.
But I think, like you,
you're created to be evil.
>>ROTBART: I think there
is a childhood opportunity
to choose good or choose bad and
choose helpful or choose evil.
And that opportunity
is oftentimes
influenced by the household
that kids grow up in.
If they grow up in
a loving family,
they don't turn
into Adolf Hitler.
>>NOORY: You've seen miracles
in your life, haven't you?
>>ROTBART: I have.
>>NOORY: Give us an example.
>>ROTBART: Well, I'll
tell you the story of--
there are medical
miracles, and then there
are everyday miracles.
I'll give you a medical miracle.
Alcides was, at the time,
a 37-year-old window washer
in Manhattan.
He was washing windows on the
47th floor of a skyscraper,
and the platform that
he was working on broke.
>>NOORY: Oh, my god.
>>ROTBART: And he
fell 47 stories.
>>NOORY: Ugh.
>>ROTBART: He was taken to New
York Hospital, Cornell Medical
Center.
>>NOORY: Straight down.
>>ROTBART: Straight down.
>>NOORY: Boom.
>>ROTBART: Nothing in the
way, just hit the ground.
He was taken to New
York Hospital, where
the surgeon in charge of the
trauma unit said, why are you
bringing him here
this man is dead.
47 stories, you can't
possibly survive.
In fact, the same surgeon, the
same critical care specialist,
had published a paper of a man
who survived a 19-story fall
because that was the farthest
that anyone had ever fallen--
>>NOORY: And lived.
>>ROTBART: --and still lived.
>>ROTBART: And still lived.
In fact, if you
fall three stories,
there's a 50% chance of death,
from three stories high,
a 50% chance of death.
>>NOORY: That's about, what,
30 feet, something like that?
>>ROTBART: Exactly.
This man fell 47 stories.
He's now driving his kids
to school in Arizona.
He's walking on charity walks.
And his surgeon said, if
you believe in miracles,
this surely is one.
And that's on the
medical miracle side.
That's one of the 85 stories
in the "Miracles We Have Seen"
book.
But let me ask your
viewers to look out
the window that they're
closest to, whatever
window they're close to.
And I want you to find something
in that window, in your view,
that humans have created.
And I challenge you
to find anything
that you see through your
window that humans have created.
We haven't created the
tree that you're seeing.
We haven't created
the river that might
be running near your house.
So you'll say, well, we created
the car that just drove by.
And I'll say, but with what?
What materials did you
use to create that car?
Where did the steel come from?
Iron.
Where did the iron come from?
What have we, as
humans, created?
Miracles are everywhere
outside of our window.
A hummingbird is a miracle.
A hummingbird can flap its
wings 80 times per second,
80 times per second.
It can fly 35 miles
an hour, and it
can dive at 50 miles an hour.
Now can I make a hummingbird?
Nope.
I can't make a--
I can't even understand
a hummingbird.
A hummingbird is a miracle.
And I'll say something now
that's heretical, George.
I believe viruses are miracles.
And why are viruses miracles?
I've studied viruses in
the lab now for 40 years.
I can't make a virus.
But a virus can infect a
cell, and within a matter
of a few hours, create
1 million progeny
virus, 1 million other
viruses within a cell
until the cell gives
up and explodes,
and those viruses spread to
all the neighboring cells.
And that's why we
are so desperately
ill when we get certain
virus infections like COVID,
for example.
Viruses are miraculous.
I can't make a virus.
I'll never be-- and even if
someday I can make a virus,
I would ask, what is
the miracle that gave me
the ingenuity, the
creativity, and the brainpower
to be able to create a virus?
I haven't done it yet.
But if I can someday, that
too will be a miracle.
>>NOORY: James Van
Praagh, the medium,
talked about miracles
being commonplace.
Let's look.
>>JAMES VAN PRAAGH:
I really think
that people have to
understand miracles more.
And I think if they did, they
would realize that miracles
are part of our everyday life.
And we can have
miracles in our life
if we just work
with that energy,
and we come to
that awareness, we
come to that sense
of mindfulness.
So how many people here
in the studio audience
have experienced miracles
in some way or another?
You have.
Great.
We all have.
Yes?
But do we acknowledge them?
Sometimes you acknowledge them
because we all have to-- it'll
be right there in front of us.
We know this is a
miracle this happened.
But I think miracles can
happen in little ways.
I think in subtle ways
they happen as well.
I think what a
miracle is is really
confirmation of the divine.
Yeah?
I really believe it's
confirmation of the divine.
And I think a miracle
happens every single day
within the body, where the cells
change, and die off, and grow,
and reproduce.
And I think as we
look around us,
and every day we
experience a brand new day,
I think that's a miracle.
I think it's just God
showing God's self.
Yeah?
And I think that we are
all that God energy.
And I think we
could have miracles,
and miracles are a part
of our everyday existence,
as long as we take the time to
be mindful about who we are.
>>NOORY: You agree with him?
>>ROTBART: Absolutely.
And I think that
as a physician, I
am more acutely aware of the
miracles of the human body
that he alluded to,
perhaps, than other people.
And I'm also a patient.
I had quadruple bypass
surgery six years ago
for heart disease.
And I-- other than the
scar running down my chest,
somehow, my body managed
to heal from that.
That's a miracle.
But it's also a miracle that
when I get the tiniest paper
cut, the tiniest
paper cut, my body
mobilizes first responders
to come to that paper cut
and heal it--
miraculous,
absolutely miraculous.
And we are living miracles,
and it's our opportunity
to look out the window,
as I was saying before,
and recognize the miracles
that are outside of us as well.
>>NOORY: It is amazing.
The body is just an
incredible machine
that fixes itself, takes care of
itself, if you take care of it.
>>ROTBART: That's right.
And one of the concepts
of no regrets living
is the responsibility to heal.
And that includes
healing ourselves.
That includes taking care of
our bodies, as you just said.
And then our bodies
take care of us.
Not always.
We still have not gotten
to the point where we
can overcome all the diseases.
My dad died of
pancreatic cancer.
That was 40 years ago.
To this day, pancreatic cancer--
>>NOORY: It's the worst.
>>ROTBART: --it's
still the worst.
>>NOORY: It is the worst.
>>ROTBART: And we
haven't gotten there yet.
We haven't been able
to heal and cure.
But the legacy of
medicine and the ingenuity
that we have been imbued
with is that someday we will.
Someday we will cure
pancreatic cancer.
I'm confident of that.
>>NOORY: I was at a restaurant
with my producer Tom
Danheiser several
years ago, and we
ran into Patrick Swayze,
the late actor who
died of pancreatic cancer.
And I said, Tom,
go up and get him.
Let's get him for the show.
And so Tom went up
there, was very polite,
and Swayze was
very, very cordial.
Most people don't want you
coming up to their table,
and I understand that.
But Swayze said, sit down,
let's talk for a little bit.
And they had a
little discussion.
We didn't know, and I'm not
sure Swayze knew at the time,
that he had pancreatic cancer.
But he died a couple
of years later.
Once you get it, you
can't fight it, can you?
>>ROTBART: Well, the
survival during my dad's era,
40 years ago, was about a
year, once after diagnosis.
My dad lived 13 months.
And now the survival
is a little bit better,
perhaps as long as
two years, on average.
But compared to the
progress that we've
made with other cancers,
it's still dismal.
But every time we have faced
as a society apparently
incurable diseases, apparently
unstoppable pandemics, when
we have been faced with
horrific natural disasters,
terrible man-made accidents, our
trajectory as humans is upward.
Somehow, we have managed to
overcome so many of those
that I am optimistic.
I'm optimistic.
>>NOORY: You are very optimistic
of humanity, aren't you?
>>ROTBART: I am, and I'll
tell you this perverse basis
for some of that.
You can't be optimistic
reading the newspaper.
It's impossible.
And nobody even reads
the newspaper anymore.
You can't be optimistic
reading the news
or hearing the news anymore.
>>NOORY: Are there newspapers?
[LAUGHTER]
>>ROTBART: Not for long.
My family is-- my
wife, my kids--
are addicted to the "Game
of Thrones" TV show.
I can't stand it.
>>NOORY: A lot of people are.
>>ROTBART: A lot of people are.
>>NOORY: I haven't
even watched it.
>>ROTBART: Right, well, I
walk by the TV when it's on,
and I am horrified by
the brief interlude
that I have with what's
going on on the screen.
And I can't imagine
what they see in it.
But historians tell us that
the reality of medieval history
is not that far different
from what's being portrayed
on the "Game of Thrones."
That is--
>>NOORY: That's true.
>>ROTBART: --mankind,
humankind, humanity
was in an awful place not
that long ago, centuries,
but within the scope
of human existence.
And when we look at
our civilization today
and the improvement--
I mean, we stop
at stoplights now.
We stand in lines
waiting for things.
We don't routinely
stab ourselves,
stab the people who are
standing in front of us
in order to get ahead in line.
That's "Game of Thrones"--
>>NOORY: Most of us don't.
>>ROTBART: Most of us.
You're right, we've
talked about some
of the evil that still exists.
But in general, humanity
is on an upward trajectory.
And you have to look
at the big picture.
You have to look at the
entirety of human history
to appreciate it.
But in general, we are
on an upward trajectory.
>>NOORY: What do you mean
by "no regrets living"?
>>ROTBART: When I was a medical
student in the late 1970s,
I took care of a
50-year-old man.
And "take care of" is the
wrong way to express it.
Medical students don't do
much providing of care,
so we have a chance to do a
lot of talking to our patients.
>>NOORY: Right, observation.
>>ROTBART: Observation.
So I spent a lot of time talking
to this 50-year-old man who
had been diagnosed with
a terminal disease,
and had only months to live.
And the entire conversation
was about his regrets,
was about what he had not yet
had a chance to accomplish
in his life, who
he had not yet had
a chance to express
his love to, places
that he had not yet traveled--
>>NOORY: People to apologize to.
>>ROTBART: --people
to apologize to.
It was a recognition
that he can't do it over,
that the time was done,
and he had great regrets.
And from that day
on, I began trying
to live my life
with fewer regrets.
And again, the culmination
of those seven keys
that we talked about at
the beginning to achieving
no regrets, or at
least fewer regrets.
No regrets may be a
little bit of a hyperbole.
We all have some regrets.
But we can get
past most of them,
and we can prevent most
of the future ones,
>>NOORY: You know the old
saying, "woulda, coulda,
shoulda."
>>ROTBART: "Woulda,
coulda, shoulda."
>>NOORY: And there's a
phrase that I used to use,
of all things said of tongue
and pen, the saddest of which,
"what might have been."
>>ROTBART: What might have been,
that's exactly right, George.
>>NOORY: You have
to move forward.
>>ROTBART: You have to move
forward, and the way to do that
is in key number six.
And that is, to seek
self forgiveness.
When we think about woulda,
coulda, shoulda in the past,
what we wish would
have been, we have
to recognize that there was
a context, that the decisions
that we made, the
actions that we took,
all occurred within the
context of that day.
We are now living
with the outcome.
But we have to
remember that we made
the decisions in that context.
And in that context, we may
have made the wrong decision.
But it was a decision
that we made,
and now we have to
learn from that.
We have to move beyond that.
And we have to do
everything we can
to prevent the kind of regret
that we had in the past
from recurring.
>>NOORY: I used
to beat myself up
years ago for decisions I
made that didn't turn out
the right way.
All of a sudden, I
realized, wait a minute.
I just learned from this.
This is an experience that
has helped me, not hurt me.
And that's the way
I live these days,
and it's made a tremendous
difference in my life.
>>ROTBART: I have to predict
that it's eliminated some
of those woulda, coulda,
shouldas, those regrets that--
>>NOORY: I don't
say that anymore.
>>ROTBART: Exactly.
And that really is the key.
The self-forgiveness
key of no regrets living
is that we have to
begin to acknowledge
that we're not perfect.
We are human, and that
by acknowledging that,
there are going to
have been mistakes.
There may be mistakes
in the future,
but we've learned how
to cope with them.
>>NOORY: Jack Canfield, of
course, "Chicken Soup"--
>>ROTBART: Of course.
>>NOORY: --was on Gaia's
Masterclass program
talking about finding
one's purpose in life.
>>JACK CANFIELD:
Soren Kierkegaard,
who was a Danish
philosopher, a theologian,
and psychologist said,
"God has given each of us
our 'marching orders.'
Our purpose here on Earth
is to find those orders
and carry them out.
Those orders acknowledge our
special gifts and talents."
And so each of us
has marching orders.
And you know what they
are because they're
encoded in you as your talents.
And when you're
doing that talent,
you're feeling the joy we talked
about earlier, so again, joy
being our guidance system.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, who
was an American philosopher
and a poet, said, "Each
man has his own vocation.
The talent is the call.
There is one direction in which
all space is open to him."
Think about that.
When you're doing what you're
supposed to do, doors open.
If you'll push through that
first level of resistance,
you open up.
Then things start to soar.
It's like if you've
ever been in a plane,
and you think you're
never going to take off.
And then all of a sudden, you
do and it's working really hard.
But once you get up to
35,000 feet, it coasts,
uses a lot less fuel.
And you get-- you're coasting
along up in the jet stream,
and so forth.
And that's what
our life is like.
We have to be willing to do
that thing which is easy.
We're going to
get some rejection
to test if we're
really committed.
But if you stay passionate
and committed to it,
then what starts to happen is
you get to coast a little bit.
>>NOORY: Spot on, no?
>>ROTBART: Spot on.
And that really--
seeking purpose
is the other part
of key number six.
And in addition to
Kierkegaard and Emerson,
I'll quote Viktor
Frankl, who was
the psychologist and
the founder of what's
now called logotherapy.
And he wrote a
seminal book called
"Man's Search for Meaning."
And in that book, he said
that once we have purpose
in our lives, we live longer.
And in fact, scientists have
subsequently proven that.
>>NOORY: I agree.
>>ROTBART: They've looked
at the impact of purpose,
the impact of having
meaning, and they
find that not only
do we live longer.
We live healthier, and we
can even defeat cancer.
We're less lonely, and
we're less prone to suicide.
And all of that
is because we have
found purpose in our lives.
And we are the only species on
Earth that has to seek purpose.
Other species are
instinctively purposeful.
They procreate, they
protect their young,
and then they do it again.
>>NOORY: And they
protect themselves.
>>ROTBART: And they
But we have to go beyond that.
Humans are empowered to find
a purpose beyond instinct.
And when we do that, when we
recognize our purpose in life,
we actually can act more
instinctively toward it
because we know the
direction that we're headed.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
I mean, there's no question
about having purpose, having
direction in your life,
and moving forward.
>>ROTBART: That's right.
Yeah, and it leads to
no regrets because if we
know where we're going, even
if we haven't been there yet,
even if we have those woulda,
coulda, shouldas in our life,
but we know where
we're going now,
we are less regretful
of what we haven't yet
accomplished because we know
what we have to yet accomplish.
>>NOORY: When you
look at all of this
and put it together with a
person in his life or her life,
it's a dramatic change.
It makes them like life a
little bit better, doesn't it?
>>ROTBART: Yeah, [CHUCKLES]
it's the subtitle of the book.
And that is, "Keys to a Life
of Wonder and Contentment."
If I look out the
window and recognize
the power of something
greater than me,
the responsibility that I
have toward that greater
context, the potential for
reward and punishment-- and I'm
not even talking about
reward or punishment
that may come down from above.
I'm talking about
the sense of reward
and the sense of
punishment that we
have when we do something
that we know is good
and we do something
that we know is bad,
that immediate sense of
reward for doing kindness,
punishment for being cruel.
We recognize that.
And if we can establish for
ourselves reward and punishment
as a truism, that we are
truly rewarded and punished
by every action that we have,
we will have fewer opportunities
to regret because we
will be choosing reward
instead of choosing punishment.
>>NOORY: Was there an
episode that helped
shape your no regrets
philosophy in life?
>>ROTBART: Well,
there have been many,
but I have always regretted
not taking the opportunity
to travel to a destitute part of
the world to practice medicine.
Many of my colleagues did.
>>NOORY: A troubled area?
>>ROTBART: A troubled area.
They went with Doctors
Without Borders.
They went to hurricane-ravaged
or earthquake-ravaged parts
of the world.
They would spend 30 days
helping to construct a clinic
to help eradicate malaria.
My colleagues did this.
I spent my career in
the intensive care
unit taking care of the
sickest kids in Colorado.
And I didn't have the courage to
do what my colleagues had done,
and that is to leave
my comfort zone.
And I regretted that.
And then I came
to terms with it,
and I did what I
mentioned before.
I recognized the context.
The stage of my career, the
work that I was doing here
that I felt was
important, the family
that I would be leaving
behind with young kids
to go abroad to do,
obviously, to do good.
But when I recognized
that context,
I realized that regrets
can be overcome.
Past regrets can be overcome
by acknowledging the situation
that we're in, and by
comforting ourselves
by the alternative good
that we are trying to do.
>>NOORY: Well, look at the good
that you did for the people
that you helped in these ER
rooms, and places like that.
>>ROTBART: That was what
I ultimately told myself.
And I was worried
that as a specialist,
as an infectious
diseases doctor,
that I didn't have the
general pediatric skills
that my colleagues who went with
Doctors Without Borders had,
that I wouldn't know what
to do with the routine stuff
anymore because I was taking
care of such sick kids.
But then I told
myself, but you're
taking care of such sick kids.
Somebody needs to do that,
not just go to Haiti.
And so I learned to
live with that regret.
>>NOORY: What about evil?
Where does evil fit
in on some of this?
>>ROTBART: The third key of
no regrets living is to heal.
And as a physician,
that's paramount for me--
healing ourselves,
healing our patients,
healing our friends and family.
But I think we also need to heal
society, and to heal the world.
And each of us has
a part in that.
And the greatest
need for healing
is the need to heal evil.
And it's hard to believe
that we can do that.
>>NOORY: And there's a
lot of evil out there.
>>ROTBART: There's a
And it's those
horrible news stories
that we talked
about a moment ago.
How can we possibly believe
that we can heal evil,
that we can prevent the
Genghis Khans, the Adolf
Hitlers, the Joseph Stalins?
How can we prevent the
shooter in the skyscraper
in Las Vegas who fires
down indiscriminately
onto a concert?
How can we heal
that kind of evil?
And I'll give you an example
of how I think we can do that.
The example comes from
Whitwell, Tennessee.
It's a rural population
of 2,000 people.
And in 1998, they were teaching
their middle school kids
about the Holocaust.
And the kids learned that some
Norwegians would clip a paper
clip to their lapel as a silent
protest against the Nazis.
And so these kids
thought, what if we
collected paper clips
in commemoration
of those who were killed?
And they set out to collect
6 million paper clips
for the 6 million
Jews who were killed,
and then ultimately 11 million
paper clips for the gays,
the Gypsies, the disabled, who
were also killed by Hitler.
They received paper clips
from George W. Bush,
from Bill Clinton, from
celebrities across the country,
and across the world.
They collected 30 million paper
clips in Whitwell, Tennessee
because fifth grade students
learned about the Holocaust.
People donated artifacts
from World War II,
including an
authentic railroad car
that had been used
to transport victims
to concentration camps, which
is now a museum in Whitwell,
Tennessee.
>>NOORY: Ha!
That's fantastic.
>>ROTBART: The key thing
about Whitwell, Tennessee
is that as far as anyone
knows, there was never
a Jewish family living there.
There was never a gay
family living there.
This was a community that
learned from its children.
The adults learned
from the children.
And that, from child to
adult, is how we prevent evil.
>>NOORY: The human mind
does a lot of things.
On a TED Talk, Charles
Bennett talks a lot
about being prepared with
scientific breakthroughs
of a prepared mind.
>> CHARLES BENNETT:
The prepared mind,
Louis Pasteur talked
about the prepared mind.
It's the key to
scientific discovery.
A prepared mind also has
chance, as you mentioned.
The prepared mind is a person
or a thinker who's out there,
has contact, and also takes
the opportunity, as Louis
Pasteur said, and with that, can
make some terrific discoveries
>>ROTBART: Louis Pasteur
is one of my heroes.
It's a hero of every
infectious disease doctor
because Louis Pasteur was
the grandfather of all germ
treatment, of the germ
theory, pasteurization.
The term "pasteurization,"
comes from Louis Pasteur.
He's a personal hero.
He's a hero of many of us.
But the one concept that has
stuck with so many people who
are not infectious
disease doctors
is that chance favors
the prepared mind.
Discovery favors
And that, ultimately, is the
true evidence of something
greater than us.
We have been-- as
far as we know,
other species have not
been as well imbued
with the capacity of our
brain to overcome the greatest
challenges of the world.
>>NOORY: Oh, huge.
>>ROTBART: Huge.
And our prepared minds
have cured many cancers,
have cured many
incurable diseases.
Our prepared minds have
made airplane travel safer,
automobile travel safer.
There was a 7.5
magnitude earthquake
in Alaska a couple of years
ago, and there was essentially
no damage.
There were no lives lost.
Why?
Because our prepared
minds now know
how to build
earthquake-proof structures.
>>NOORY: There.
>>ROTBART: There.
>>NOORY: There, yeah.
>>ROTBART: Sadly, not
everywhere in the world.
But the prepared minds are
capable of expanding that
to everywhere in the world.
We now have hurricane
warning systems.
We have tornado warning systems.
We have safer cars.
Our prepared minds
have advanced society
so dramatically
that I do believe
that those prepared minds--
as the example in
Whitwell, Tennessee--
are going to teach
us how to cure,
how to heal the world from evil.
>>NOORY: Dr. Rotbart, we
started talking about miracles
on this program, the person
who fell 47 stories and lived,
and things like that.
Who creates the miracles?
Is it us?
Or are we tapping
into something?
>>ROTBART: Well, the first key
to no regrets living is belief.
And for me, the answer
to your question, George,
is that miracles
are not accidental.
And miracles can be
man-made, but they're
manmade because humans have
been given the capacity
to create them
because we have been
given the capacity by something
greater than ourselves.
Miracles come from
outside of us,
oftentimes using us as a
vehicle for transmitting it.
There is something called the
law of sensitive dependence
on initial conditions, better
known as the butterfly effect.
And the butterfly effect says
that the flap of a butterfly's
wings in one part of the
world, with infinite subsequent
events, can lead to a
tsunami across the world
because those infinite
inflection points along the way
can build and can
change something.
Nowhere better is that seen than
what happened in Wuhan, China,
where an event in
one part of the world
spread to literally shut
down the entire world.
>>NOORY: The planet.
>>ROTBART: The planet.
That was the butterfly
effect, the law
of sensitive dependence on
initial conditions, in extreme.
The capacity for miracles, the
capacity to create miracles
exists within every one of
us when we flap our wings.
When we flap our
butterfly wings,
we have the capacity to spread
that effect across the world.
We don't know who's going to
be affected by what we do.
But people are going to
And that's where we can
create the miracles.
>>NOORY: Will we ever have a
planet of love and happiness,
where people take care
of people, instead
of wars and famines?
>>ROTBART: Well,
again, you asked
before if I'm an
optimist or a pessimist,
and I am an optimist.
I think we are better
now than we were
during the "Game of Thrones."
I think we are more loving and
more kind and more thoughtful
now than we were
during the Holocaust.
>>NOORY: Most of us.
>>ROTBART: Most of us.
Are we ever going
to all be that way?
I hope so.
I'm also a student
of human nature,
and I recognize that there
is that evil on one shoulder,
whereas good as on
the other shoulder.
And we have to figure out a
way to defeat the bad shoulder.
So I wish I could say the
answer to that is obviously yes.
But I'll put an
asterisk on it, and I'll
say, yes, I think we will
ultimately get to that world
if we don't destroy
ourselves first.
>>NOORY: If you were talking to
a group of kids, 10 years old,
who just wanted to know
about their future,
what would you tell them?
>>ROTBART: Well, I have the
opportunity as a pediatrician
to do that a lot.
And I tell them
that each of them,
each of the children
in that room,
has the chance to be a
factor for good in the world,
to be a creator of miracles,
and that each of those kids, we
depend upon each of those kids
to make our world a better
place.
We've had failures.
My parents' generation
had even more failures.
Our grandparents' generation
We are getting
better, but we depend
upon the future generations
to carry that forth.
>>NOORY: Doctor, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>ROTBART: George, it was
a pleasure to be here.
Thank you.
>>NOORY: It's remarkable,
talking about just living
your life without any regrets.
It's something to take
heed and live your life by.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]